1. **Everything comes from somewhere and goes somewhere. **
   - can you send a smile to this "somewhere"?
   - which obstacles do you have with this?

2. **A clouded mind multiplies bad karma and suffering, yours and your neighbors'**
   - all evil deeds, big and small, were committed by people with a clouded mind

3. ** Disassemble your mind into the observer, the observed, and the background**
   - realize that clinging to the observed is meaningless and futile
   - what made you think that this is the truth? How many times has it let you down?
   - what made you think that this is of any value? What made you think that this makes sense?
   - clinging is not for the good
   - do not cling to the observed (thoughts/feelings/sensations). Who is the observer? What is the background? That's where the focus is.

# Right now you are most likely in a clouded state of mind

  - you are in a hurry to close the most important information in your life
  - you worry about things that do not exist (past and future)
  - you care about a fleeting pleasure/inconvenience that will soon disappear and you will not even remember it
  - you listen to the "inner voice" that carries some nonsense that has nothing to do with reality
  - you perceive reality not as an illusion
  - you consider other people as the source of your misfortunes
    - when your relative dies, you feel a great loss, but you are indifferent to the losses of others
    - you do not remember about your own death, your position in space/galaxy

# Being in a clouded state of mind, you create bad karma

- people who are in a clouded state of mind create an incredible amount of suffering. Continuing to be in it, you remain in the ranks with them: **you are no better than any most terrible person** that you can think of, the differences are purely circumstantial.
  - bad karma will bring you bad consequences
  - bad karma will increase suffering in the world

# Get out now!

- **decide what karma you will create?**
- focus on the present moment, it is all you have
- remember that all your phenomena are just images, phantoms, husks. Watch how they arise and disappear. Where do they arise and disappear?
- **divide into the observer, the observed and the stage on which everything happens, transfer your attention there**
- transfer attention to breathing
- reflect on the non-existence of the past and future. Why worry about them?
- reflect on the transience of everything that happens. Why worry about it?
- reflect on the limitations of your everyday perception (no focus on the inevitability of death, no focus on your position in space/cosmos, although these things are much more important than what you'll eat for breakfast; that the fish also believes that it knows reality as it is)
- reflect on the fact that **the external and other people cannot make you happy or unhappy**, that this is your choice (think about the inflated expectations of loved ones, the same gloomy poor souls)
- reflect on the happiness of being born a human in the 21st century

# Quick Self-Check

- are you in a hurry to close the Formula?
- don't you want to meditate?
- are you procrastinating?
- are you irritated with others?
- are you in a hurry to chew?
- are you snacking? not drinking water?
- don't you take a break?