Let go! Practice!

When you feel intense desire (dukkha), remember:

- The voice that whispers it is the voice of an evolutionarily advanced monkey. By definition, it cannot see the true nature of things: for successful evolution, survival and adaptability are necessary, not the pursuit of truth or happiness. **It is limited and shortsighted. How many times has it deceived you? It worries about things that don’t exist (past, future)**.

- If dukkha is caused by other living beings, remember that they are no different from you. **They are as unfortunate as you, prisoners of samsara.** Any feelings other than pity, love, and compassion are foolish and lack both logic and sense.

- If dukkha is caused by physical or mental phenomena, remember that everything is temporary. Look at your hand, as if through the skin. **Do you see the bones? That’s you.** This is what will soon become of you. It’s already happened – the perception of time is subjective, the future is near. You’re already dead. Are you sad that someone in ancient Rome wanted sweets?

- Remember, you’re lucky to be born in the 21st century! You live better than a king! **If you were given a choice – to live as you are or to be reborn in hell,** would you be happy with your situation?

- If everything can be fixed, why worry? If nothing can be fixed, why worry?

- Why are you tired? If you feel the same at the start and after an hour, why does it initially feel OK, but later it feels worse? Nothing really changes. **Focus on the present moment, reset your psyche.** Don’t allow the second arrow in. Compare. Analyze.

- If you listen to this voice, **you enter the club of the most terrible and evil people you can imagine.** The difference between you and them becomes circumstantial. Why do you assume you’d act better in their conditions?

- Remember that **it’s an illusion to think happiness can come from changing external circumstances.** Even in a beautiful place, when you leave to rest in a room, you stop seeing the place, but you still feel good, don’t you? Now you’re not seeing that place – and you feel bad. The circumstances are the same (in both cases, you’re not seeing that beauty), but your feelings are different. It’s pure illusion!

- Remember that **beyond what is observed, there’s the observer and the stage where it all takes place.** Don’t identify yourself with what’s observed. You are more.

# When dukkha comes, remember that it’s an excellent opportunity for training.

**Replace the selfish and meaningless feeling of dissatisfaction with the desire to ease the suffering of all living beings!** After all, they, like you, are part of the universe. This is the only way to change something. **For in this world, hatred never ceases by hatred, but by the absence of hatred. This is the eternal dhamma.**

| Samsara          | Nirvana |
|------------------|---------|
| Anger at others  | See other beings as Buddhas with defiled minds causing them suffering |
| Craving pleasure | Sense of infinite joy in human birth |
| Regret for the past | Let go of ghosts of the past, they no longer exist |
| Anxiety about the future | Don’t imagine nonexistent problems: the future is unknown or not as we imagine; soon it will become the past, which doesn’t exist |
| Identification with the inner "monkey" | Recognize the limitations of monkey thinking, focus on the "observer" and "background" |
| Feeling tired     | Don’t overthink, don’t let the "second arrow" in, accept things as they truly are |
| Feeling bored     | See with "beginner's eyes" as if you’re seeing this room, this light, for the first time |
