Everything comes from somewhere and goes somewhere.

# Right now you are most likely in a clouded state of mind

- you are worried about things that do not exist (past and future)
- you are concerned about a fleeting pleasure/inconvenience that will soon disappear and you will not even remember it
- you are listening to an "inner voice" that carries some nonsense that has nothing to do with reality
- you perceive reality not as an illusion
- you consider other people as the source of your misfortunes
- you do not remember your death, your position in space/cosmos, not to mention the emptiness of reality from concepts

# Being in a clouded state of mind, you create bad karma

- people who are in a clouded state of mind create an incredible amount of suffering. By continuing to dwell in it, you remain in their ranks: you are no better than any terrible person you can think of, the differences are purely circumstantial.
- bad karma will bring you bad consequences
- bad karma will increase suffering in the world

# Get out now!

- focus on the present moment, it is all you have
- remember that all your phenomena are just images, phantoms, husks. Watch how they arise and disappear. Where do they arise and disappear?
- turn your attention to your breathing
- reflect on the non-existence of the past and future. Why worry about them?
- reflect on the transience of everything that happens. Why worry about it?
- reflect on the limitations of your everyday perception (no focus on the inevitability of death, no focus on your position in space/cosmos, although these things are much more important than what you'll eat for breakfast; that the fish also believes that it knows reality as it is)
- reflect on the fact that the outside and other people cannot make you happy or unhappy, that this is your choice (think about the inflated expectations of loved ones, the same gloomy poor souls)
- reflect on the happiness of being born a human in the 21st century

# Quick self-check

- are you in a hurry to close the Formula?
- don't you want to meditate?
- are you procrastinating?
- are you irritated with others?
- are you in a hurry to chew?
- are you snacking? not drinking water?
- don't you take a break?
